---

title: NoSQL - When to Leverage the Future
description: "When to start investing time into NoSQL"
tags: [blog, nosql, big data, ha, high availability, unstructured data]
comments: true
image:
  feature: texture-feature-01.jpg
---

**Dealing with big, big data**  
With hardware costs decreasing daily (excluding acts of nature, see [Thailand floods](http://www.nytimes.com/2011/11/07/business/global/07iht-floods07.html?pagewanted=all&_r=1&)), building a massive server for a relational database is an viable option for many companies. But vertical scaling has its limits, and horizontally scaling some of the most popular relational databases is painful…so very painful, if possible at all in some cases. So when dealing with huge amounts of data, such as that generated by logging, analytics and finance applications, NoSQL solutions are well worth a look.<br><br>
**Storing semi-structured data**  
Building a relational database that does what it’s supposed to and performs rapidly fast requires developing a good solid schema. Unfortunately, thanks in large part to the rise in the amount of semi-structured data that companies are gaining access to and looking to harness, developing schemas can be a challenge. This is where document-oriented NoSQL databases come in. From MongoDB and CouchDB, which use JSON and JSON-style documents, to MarkLogic which is a native XML database, companies today have a growing number of ways to deal with information that simply isn’t a fit for traditional databases.<br><br>
**Supporting high-availability services**  
While commercially viable replication and clustering solutions exist today for most of the most popular relational databases, a number of popular NoSQL databases were built from the ground-up with HA in mind and arguably make it more accessible to developers. Cassandra, for instance (or multiple instances for that matter :P), has an extremely easy mechanism to cluster nodes. Lay a few stable seeds and watch the gossip go to work….